These source files, in restructured text format, are designed to be compiled into stand-alone HTML documents
(and sometimes PDF) using the Sphinx documentation generator (http://sphinx.pocoo.org/).

See requirements.txt for the python dependencies required to build the documentation.

Some source files reference tables from the [invest-sample-data](https://bitbucket.org/natcap/invest-sample-data/src/master/) repo.
A clone of `invest-sample-data` must exist in the top level of this repo before you build the documentation.
Execute the following command to clone `invest-sample-data` and check out the correct revision:

`make get_sampledata`

Execute the following command to build HTML documentation from the reStructuredText source:

`make html`

Then find the html documents in `build/html` and view them in a web browser to evaulate for correctness.

## Style Guidelines

Our [style guide google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BHwHDu_I-x0s_2GsbUb4rfVmXMkl7kl97sx2suBTLh8/edit?usp=sharing) is actively being developed.
For anything not listed in our style guide, follow the [Google developer documentation style guidelines](https://developers.google.com/style).

## Requirements

`requirements.txt` is the complete list of requirements needed to build the user's guide.
However, `pip install -r requirements.txt` will fail in a fresh environment because `natcap.invest` depends on `gdal`, which cannot be `pip install`ed unless the GDAL library and headers already exist on the system.

Since the GDAL library and headers can be installed with `conda`, an `environment.yml` is included that will install GDAL with `conda`, and then the rest of the requirements with `pip`.

## Internationalization
Nothing special needs to be done when routinely editing the source RST files. See the InVEST internationalization README for more background.

There are four components of the user's guide that have separate mechanisms of translation: text in the source RST files; text provided by Sphinx such as "Note" or "Warning"; text generated by the custom `:investspec:` role that lives in `investspec.py`; and text generated by the custom `:investspec:` role that's imported from `natcap.invest`.

---
All commands below should be run from the project root directory, and `<LANG>` should be replaced with the appropriate ISO 639-1 language code.

---

### To update translations for a language

#### 1. update translations for the source RST text
Run `make gettext` to extract the messages and create new POT files. This uses the Sphinx gettext builder to extract a message from each document node. This is nice because it works without having to modify the source RST in any way. There will be one POT file for each source RST file and they will be created in `build/gettext`.

Update the PO files for the language from the new POT files:
```
$ sphinx-intl update --locale-dir source/locales --pot-dir build/gettext --language <LANG>
```
Or to update PO files for all languages:
```
$ sphinx-intl update --locale-dir source/locales --pot-dir build/gettext
```

Send the PO files in `source/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES` to the translator for the language. The translator will fill in the translations and send them back.

Replace the PO files in `source/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES` with the updated ones from the translator.

#### 2. update translations for the text in `investspec.py`
```
pybabel extract \
   --no-wrap \
   --project InVEST \
   --version 3.10 \
   --msgid-bugs-address esoth@stanford.edu \
   --copyright-holder "Natural Capital Project" \
   --output extensions/investspec/internationalization/messages.pot \
   extensions/investspec/investspec.py

pybabel update \  # update message catalog from template
   --locale <LANG> \
   --input-file extensions/investspec/internationalization/messages.pot \
   --output-file extensions/investspec/internationalization/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po
```

Check that the changes look correct, then commit:
```
git diff
git add extensions/investspec/internationalization/messages.pot extensions/investspec/internationalization/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po
git commit -m "extract message catalog template and update investspec <LANG> catalog from it"
```

Send `extensions/investspec/internationalization/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po` to the translator and wait to get it back. The translator will fill in the `msgstr` values for any new or edited messages.

Replace `extensions/investspec/internationalization/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po` with the updated version received from the translator and commit.

```
git add extensions/investspec/internationalization/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po
git commit -m "update investspec <LANG> message catalog with new translations"
```

#### 3. update translations for text imported from `natcap.invest`
Also update the relevant translations in `natcap.invest` (see the InVEST internationalization README).


### To add a new language

#### 1. add a new language for the source RST text
Follow the same directions above to [update translations](#1-update-translations-for-the-source-rst-text). The `sphinx-intl update` command will create new PO files for a language if it doesn't already exist.

#### 2. add a new language for the text in `investspec.py`
```
# create the expected directory structure
mkdir -p extensions/investspec/internationalization/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES/

pybabel init \  # initialize the message catalog from the template
   --input-file extensions/investspec/internationalization/messages.pot \
   --output-file extensions/investspec/internationalization/locales/<LANG>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po
   --locale <LANG>
```

#### 3. add a new language for the text provided by Sphinx
The language will most likely be on the [list of languages supported by Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-language), and so nothing needs to be done. But if not, we'll need to figure out how to provide our own message catalog for Sphinx-generated messages.

#### 4. add a new language for the text imported from `natcap.invest`
Make sure that `natcap.invest` supports the new language as well (see the InVEST internationalization README).


## To build docs in a different language
```
make SPHINXOPTS="-D language=<LANG>" html
```

